HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I don't think it's anybody's
business if I
want to send money to the vets.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Responding to
media scrutiny,
Donald Trump accounts for the
nearly $6 million
he raised to benefit veterans
groups.
Also ahead: More than 1,000
migrants lost
their lives attempting to cross
the Mediterranean
just last week, marking a surge
in journeys
as the weather turns warmer.
Plus: Brazil's favelas become
the stage for
bold policing experiments aiming
to push out
violent drug gangs before the
Olympics.
MARIO ANDRADA, Communications
Director, Rio
2014: We don't want the Games to
be an island
of success and perfection. We
want the Games
to transform Rio, and to make
Rio a safer
city in the years to come.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
Republicans' presidential
nominee-to-be declared today
that, when it
comes to veterans, he has indeed
put his money
where his mouth is.
Lisa Desjardins has our report.
LISA DESJARDINS: It was
something relatively
rare for Donald Trump, going on
the defensive,
as he held a news conference at
his New York
hotel.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I have raised a tremendous
amount of money
for the vets, almost $6 million,
and more
money is going to come in, I
believe, over
the next little while, too, but
I have raised
almost $6 million. All of the
money has been
paid out. I have never received
such bad publicity
for doing such a good job.
LISA DESJARDINS: This goes back
to January,
when Trump boasted about a
fund-raiser he
held for veterans while
boycotting a Republican
debate.
DONALD TRUMP: We just cracked $6
million,
right?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: But, for
months, reporters
have asked for proof and
specifics. Today,
Trump revealed where that money
went, an array
of more than 40 organizations,
from work with
service dogs to scholarships for
families.
And he quickly turned to going
on attack against
journalists covering the story.
DONALD TRUMP: I have to tell
you, the press
is so dishonest. This sleazy guy
right over
here from ABC, he's a sleaze.
QUESTION: It seems as though
you're resistant
to scrutiny, the kind of
scrutiny that comes
with running for president of
the United States.
(CROSSTALK)
DONALD TRUMP: But you know what?
When I raise
money...
(CROSSTALK)
QUESTION: You raise money for
veterans.
DONALD TRUMP: Excuse me. Excuse
me. I have
watched you on television.
You're a real beauty.
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump did get
some supportive
words today from the top
Republican in the
Senate, Mitch McConnell.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader:
Well, I think Donald Trump is a
phenomenon.
WOMAN: Really? You don't think
our party changed
their views on those issues?
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL: Look, I
haven't changed
my views. And I don't believe
Donald Trump
is going to change the
Republican Party in
any fundamental way. My view is
that Trump
has earned the nomination
because he went
out and got the most votes. And
we need to
be respectful of the electoral
process that
has produced this nominee.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meanwhile,
Democrats were
all offense and metaphor in
California. Bernie
Sanders showed up to support the
Golden State
Warriors in their must-win and
did-win NBA
playoff game last night. He
tweeted: "Last
week, Golden State was down
three games to
one. Tonight, they finished off
a great comeback
in California. I like
comebacks."
Today, in San Francisco, Sanders
was surrounded
by nurses, one of his biggest
sources of union
support, as he talked health
care.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
How can we be satisfied when 28
million people
in this country today have zero
health insurance?
LISA DESJARDINS: Hillary
Clinton's offense?
It came from California Governor
Jerry Brown,
who surprised many by endorsing
her today,
a big coup for the front-runner,
who has changed
her travel schedule to focus
more on the Golden
State.
But the candidate herself
stopped short of
predicting victory in
California. She spoke
by phone to MSNBC.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, I'm feeling very positive
about my campaign
in California. We are working
really hard.
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton is now
71 delegates
away from clinching the
nomination.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
The State Department put out a
fresh warning
to Americans traveling in Europe
this summer:
Watch out for terrorist attacks.
State Department spokesman John
Kirby said
there's no specific threat, but
major upcoming
events could be targets.
JOHN KIRBY, State Department
Spokesman: We
took the opportunity, since it's
the beginning
of summer, to make -- to make
our concerns
known about the potential risk
to -- of terrorist
attacks throughout Europe,
particularly when
you have got the Tour de France
starting up,
you have got this European
football championship,
and, of course, Youth -- World
Youth Day,
all of which is happening in
June and July.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The alert is
an extension
of one that was issued after the
March terrorist
attacks in Brussels. Now it will
run through
the end of August.
Elite Iraqi forces held off a
fierce counterattack
by Islamic State militants in
Fallujah today.
Government troops began
advancing into the
city yesterday, trying to end
two years of
ISIS control. Today's fighting
erupted on
the southern edge of Fallujah.
ISIS fighters
used tunnels, snipers and car
bombs in an
attack that lasted about four
hours. An estimated
50,000 people are trapped in the
city. The
U.N. Refugee Agency says ISIS is
using some
as human shields.
In Syria, heavy airstrikes
blasted a pair
of hospitals in the northern
city of Idlib.
Activists put the death toll at
23 and likely
to rise.
Diana Magnay of Independent
Television News
reports.
DIANA MAGNAY: In the mayhem of
rescue, after
a series of airstrikes on this
civilian neighborhood
of Idlib, a moment's relief for
a life spared,
a little boy, his eyes wide with
fear, his
world changed suddenly by the
savagery of
a bomb.
MAN (through translator): The
Russian warplanes
make several airstrikes on
Idlib. We can't
tell yet how many are dead or
injured. We
know there are dozens.
DIANA MAGNAY: Russia says there
wasn't them,
but Idlib is in rebel hands, and
only Russia
and the regime have airpower.
Whoever it was,
they hit two hospitals.
The bombing of hospitals in
Syria is now happening
so often, it's almost
commonplace. February's
cessation of hostilities seems
meaningless
now, Russian and regime
warplanes still a
feature of Syria's skies, and,
on the ground,
rescue workers busy saving
whoever and whatever
they can.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Washington,
the White
House condemned the hospital
attacks and said,
the international community
needs to get to
the bottom of this.
North Korea's latest attempt to
launch a ballistic
missile failed today. It's the
fourth failure
since April. U.S. and South
Korean officials
said the intermediate-range
missile could
have the range to reach Japan or
Guam. The
U.S., South Korea, Japan and
China all condemned
the North's actions.
On Wall Street today, stocks
struggled to
make much headway today. The Dow
Jones industrial
average lost 86 points to close
at 17787.
The Nasdaq rose 14 points, but
the S&P 500
dropped two.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what's leading
to a spike in migrant deaths;
Brazil's efforts
to eradicate gang violence ahead
of the Olympics;
Texas braces for record
flooding; and much
more.
Summer in the Mediterranean used
to be marked
by Northern Europeans and
Americans flocking
to beaches on holiday. But for
the past few
years, warm weather in the
region has meant
a rise in desperate migrants
taking a deadly
journey.
More than 1,000 migrants have
been killed
trying to cross the
Mediterranean Sea in the
last week. According to the
U.N., it's one
of the highest weekly death
tolls since the
crisis began in 2014.
Scenes of desperation in the
heart of the
Mediterranean. Over the past
week, rescuers
have scrambled dozens of times
to reach struggling
vessels large and small
overflowing with migrants.
A survivor from Eritrea who
chose not to give
his name says he never imagined
the danger.
MAN (through translator): All my
friends told
me it wasn't easy, don't try to
go. But I
didn't believe them. Now I
believe them. It's
very bad. But it would have been
the same
for me, because if I stayed in
my country,
I would have been dead.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This latest
unfolding disaster
off Libya is the newest chapter
in Europe's
migrant drama. The U.N. Refugee
Agency reports
that, so far this year, some
2,500 people
have died trying to reach the
continent. That's
up from about 1,800 in the same
time last
year.
WILLIAM SPINDLER, United Nations
High Commissioner
for Refugees: This highlights
the importance
of rescue operations as part of
the response
to the movement of refugees and
migrants in
the Mediterranean, and the need
for real,
safer alternatives for people
needing international
protection.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Most of the
deaths have
come on the route from North
Africa to Italy,
where the odds of being killed
are as high
as one in 23. The victims come
in all sizes.
The humanitarian organization
Sea Watch released
this photo yesterday of a baby
who drowned
off the coast of Libya.
RUBEN NEUGEBAUER, Sea-Watch
(through translator):
If we as a European community
don't want to
see such photos, we must stop
producing them.
The European Union uses the
Mediterranean
as a sort of graveyard, where
boats filled
with corpses are used to scare
those who are
still living and would maybe
want to follow.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Aid officials
also say the
rising death toll suggests
smuggling gangs
are using even riskier tactics
than before.
Today, prosecutors in Sicily
announced the
arrests of 16 suspected
smugglers. They were
on board a boat carrying nearly
900 people
who were rescued over the
weekend.
MICHELANGELO PATANE, Prosecutor
(through translator):
These smugglers make remarkable
profits. If
we consider the great number of
migrants they
manage to squeeze into those
vessels, the
earnings are substantial,
especially compared
to the low value of a dinghy and
the value
of a low-power engine.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Some survivors
say Libyan
smugglers appear to be trying to
earn extra
cash before the Islamic holy
month of Ramadan,
when daytime fasting may curtail
sailings.
Meanwhile, the human flow
between Turkey and
Greece has dropped sharply. In
march, ®MDNM /Ankara
signed an agreement with the
European Union
to stem illegal migration.
For more on this, I'm joined now
by David
Miliband, CEO of International
Rescue Committee.
David, why is this happening?
Why this surge
that we're seeing in the last
couple of weeks?
DAVID MILIBAND, Former British
Foreign Secretary:
I think there are two main
reasons that explain
this terrible, horrific wave of
death in the
Mediterranean from North Africa.
The first is the increasingly
desperate tactics
of the smugglers themselves. I
think that
the official who just spoke
about their tactics
got it absolutely right. These
are desperate
people and they're being
exploited by smuggling
gangs.
The second thing, obviously, is
that, as the
weather has got better over the
last couple
of months, the number of people
flowing from
North Africa into Italy has
grown. About 50,000,
46,000, to be precise, have come
into Europe
from North Africa this year.
And although this crisis doesn't
get much
attention to the Syrian crisis,
the people
from Africa are coming from
Nigeria, from
Somalia, from Gambia, from Cote
d'Ivoire,
from Eritrea, like the man in
the film. And
you are therefore seeing that
this is a global
refugee and migration crisis,
not just a Syrian
crisis.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But could this
be a bigger
wave, considering all of those
countries that
you just listed?
DAVID MILIBAND: Well, we know
that the world
is experiencing the biggest wave
of refugees
since the Second World War.
Twenty million
people are refugees at the
moment. That means
they're fleeing their countries
of their homeland
as a result of violence and
conflict; 40 million
people are displaced within
their own countries.
We as an international aid
organization are
working in all of these fragile
and conflict
states, be they in Africa or in
the Middle
East. And we know, to our cost,
that the amount
of need far outstrips the
ability of the system
to respond, and that's why we
say there doesn't
just need to be more money going
to international
humanitarian aid. There needs to
be a new
approach to the way refugees are
handled and
dealt with, not least to prevent
the appalling
loss of life that's taken place
on the shores
of Europe.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Some part of
this has to
do with the fact that the route
has changed
now, and the deal that Turkey
struck with
the E.U. to try to limit the
number of people
coming from Turkey crossing into
Europe, and
now they seem to be taking a
route directly
through Libya and across even
more treacherous
waters.
DAVID MILIBAND: I'm glad you
raised that,
because we have no evidence that
that is the
case, either from our own people
on the ground
or from the U.N. figures.
If you look at the 150,000
people who have
arrived in Europe this year from
-- through
Greece, you will see that
they're made up
predominantly 46 percent of
Syrians, then
Afghans, then Iraqis. If you
look at the 46,000
who have arrived in Italy from
Africa, they
are Somalis, Gambians, Cote
d'Ivoire, Eritrea.
So, although it's a good point
you make that
the clamp-down in Europe and in
Turkey might,
in time, bring people to seek an
alternative
to the Greek route, to come --
instead of
going from Turkey to Greece,
across the Aegean
Sea, they will try and make the
journey through
Egypt to Libya and then across
into North
Africa, from North Africa, into
Europe.
At the moment, the people in
Turkey who are
fleeing the Syrian conflict
predominantly
are not seeking to make that
route. They are
biding their time in Turkey.
There are reports
of very large numbers in Izmir,
one of the
Turkish ports that is as an
entrepot, as a
transit route for this.
But at the moment up, you have
got two distinct
waves, one from Syria and the
Middle East
and Afghanistan into Greece, and
then the
other from Africa through North
Africa into
Italy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, how are
the Europeans
dealing with this now new wave
of humanity
washing up on their shores?
DAVID MILIBAND: I think that the
European
approach has three elements at
the moment.
As regard to the Middle East,
they're banking
a lot on the so-called deal with
Turkey, which
is showing a lot of strain.
Remember, for
your viewers' sake, there are a
million asylum-seekers
in Germany from last year who
are having asylum
and having their claims
processed in quite
an orderly way.
There are 55,000 people in
Greece who are
currently waiting for their
claims to be dealt
with. So, the deal with Turkey
is designed
to stem that flow. But when it
comes to the
North African side of things,
the search-and-rescue
is much weaker. The legal routes
that might
eventually be available are much
less clear.
And that's why you're seeing the
increasing
desperation for the
thousand-mile --
thousand-kilometer
crossing from North Africa from
Libya to Lampedusa,
which is the Italian island
where the boats
are aiming for.
So, at the moment, Europe is
really fighting
on all fronts, while trying to
deal, cope
on all fronts, and is also
coping with the
backlog from last year. And
that's why the
European Commission have said
they are going
to come forward with new
proposals last week.
Organizations like mine, an
international
aid agency and refugee
resettlement agency
here, say that you need first
clear legal
routes. Secondly, you have got
to tackle the
problem at its source by having
proper humanitarian
aid in the countries in conflict
and in the
neighboring states, and,
thirdly, Europe has
to deal with those who have
already arrived
in Europe. And those that have a
genuine claim
to refugee status need to be
properly accommodated.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
David Miliband,
CEO of the International Rescue
Committee,
thanks so much for joining us
tonight.
DAVID MILIBAND: Thank you very
much, Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's just over
two months
until the opening ceremony of
the Olympic
Games in Rio de Janeiro.
For the host country, Brazil,
it's been a
troubled journey. The Zika
virus, corruption
scandals, and an economic and
political meltdown
have all had an impact. But for
many residents,
the most worrying development is
a spike in
crime across Rio and what
happens after the
athletes go home.
"NewsHour" producer Jon Gerberg
teamed up
with NPR's Lulu Garcia-Navarro,
and they report
from the shantytowns, or
favelas, of Rio de
Janeiro.
And a warning: Some of the
images are disturbing.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO, National
Public Radio:
The image of glamorous Rio de
Janeiro most
people know: world-famous
beaches like Copacabana,
a draw for tourists and
residents alike.
But just behind the high-rises
and hotels
lies another world. These are
two impoverished
communities called Babilonia and
Chapeu Mangueira.
They are at the heart of a bold
policing experiment
that started in 2008. It's
called pacification.
It introduced community-based
police units
to many favelas that are close
to tourist
areas, its aim, to push out the
violent drug
gangs that operated here in
advance of Brazil's
debut on the world stage with
the 2014 World
Cup and, in two months' time,
the Olympics.
Babilonia and Chapeu Mangueira
together became
the poster children of Rio's
transformation.
Crime dropped. New businesses
opened, catering
to tourists. Police would walk
around with
their weapons holstered.
Dignitaries like
U.N. Secretary-General Ban
Ki-Moon and media
like me were taken here to show
off the project's
success.
But that success is now under
threat. Pacification
is in crisis. The first time I
came to this
favela three years ago, it was
safe. It was
known as the Disneyland favela.
This time,
residents refusing to talk to us
because they
have been threatened by drug
traffickers.
And the only way we can come is
with heavily
armed police.
These pacification units, known
as UPPs, now
walk around ready for battle.
Two rival gangs
are violently fighting for
control in this
area, and police are struggling.
At the crest
of the favelas, Commander Paulo
Berbat tells
me the gangs use these jungle
paths to ferry
weapons and drugs in and out.
He told me that, in March, the
battle for
control over these routes turned
deadly.
So, he's saying that, just up
here in this
area, members of a rival gang
from a different
community used the cover of the
forest to
try and invade this community
and take it
over. There was an intense
confrontation between
the drug gang that controls this
community,
and three of the drug
traffickers were killed.
Businesses that had flourished,
attracting
foreigners, are now reporting a
50 percent
drop in revenue. Even though no
visitors have
been harmed in Babilonia and
Chapeu Mangueira,
tourists are choosing to stay
away. It's a
shocking turnaround for the
residents here.
Among them is Rodrigo da Silva.
He sells food
to make a living on the beaches
just near
his home in Chapeu Mangueira. He
had hoped
that the Olympics and
pacification would provide
new opportunities, so he opened
a hostel,
advertised on Airbnb, but
clients today are
scarce
RODRIGO DA SILVA, Brazil
(through translator):
Our business has decreased. We
had much higher
expectations in terms of hosting
people throughout
the Olympics. If the situation
had improved,
maybe I wouldn't still have to
work here on
the beach.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Concerned
about gang
pressure, da Silva only agreed
to meet us
outside his favela.
RODRIGO DA SILVA (through
translator): If
you talk too much, it ends
badly. Here's the
deal: You do not mess with their
business.
I don't mess with their stuff
and they don't
mess with mine. Everyone wins,
in a way.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: But these
violent confrontations
have led to deep personal losses
across Rio.
In another part of the city,
Dayse Napoleao
told me about the last time she
spoke to her
daughter, Sofia.
DAYSE NAPOLEAO, Brazil (through
translator):
We spoke the week of her
birthday. She said
she was going to rent a house to
leave that
area. She was planning to get
back together
with her ex-partner. She was
making so many
plans.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: A few days
later, Sofia
had been shot.
DAYSE NAPOLEAO (through
translator): I went
to see her at the hospital. The
doctor asked
me, are you prepared? I asked
him, why, sir?
The doctor said if her
hemorrhaging doesn't
stop, she won't survive. Later,
they told
me she hadn't been able to hold
on. She was
dead.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Sofia and
her 1-year-old
daughter had been living in
another pacified
favela, Vila Cruzeiro. To get
there, we needed
permission from the drug gangs
who control
the neighborhood. They didn't
want to be filmed.
Our guide was Sofia's
sister-in-law, Carol,
who was with her the day she was
shot. She
says the police from the UPP,
who were fighting
with the drug traffickers,
sprayed their apartment
with bullets. Carol recorded the
scene with
her phone minutes after.
WOMAN (through translator):
There was blood
everywhere, blood marks on the
wall, in the
washing machine where she tried
to hold on,
blood marks in the pipes. The
police said
it was a stray bullet, and that
she was on
the street.
It is a lie. She was indoors and
we have proof
of that. She was hit by two
bullets that opened
these holes in the door.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Innocent
bystanders are
being killed almost every day in
Rio. But
police too are dying in large
numbers, as
the battle over territory
continues.
On our way to film with Carol
that morning,
we heard of another casualty. We
drove to
the funeral later that day.
Police officer Eduardo Dias had
been killed
the day before, shot by gang
members as he
was leaving his UPP post.
According to the
police, he was killed on this
street in front
of the Mangueira favela, and in
plain view
of the Maracana Stadium, site of
the Olympics
opening ceremony in August. A
police pastor
at the funeral addressed the
crowd.
"Until when, dear lord, will we
have to bury
our good cops? Until when will
we bury our
children, our parents with young
kids? Do
not forget the military police
in your prayers.
Pray for us all," he said.
So far this year, 41 police have
been killed
in Rio state. Murders generally
are up 15
percent in the city, robberies
up 30 percent.
There is a sense here that
things are spiraling
out of control.
Just last week, a 16-year-old
girl was allegedly
gang-raped in a Rio favela by as
many as 30
men. Two boys, 14 and 16, were
tortured and
murdered by gang members in
another city over
the bay. Both were documented on
social media
and spread widely around Brazil.
Those who study pacification say
it's too
early to conclude whether it has
failed. But
many mistakes have been made.
IGNACIO CANO, Rio State
University: For many
of us, the hope was that UPPs
would help transform
the public security paradigm and
the police.
And, unfortunately, this is the
area in which
the advance has been more
modest, to say it
gently.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Ignacio
Cano is a professor
from Rio State University's
Laboratory on
Violence. He says police in Rio
are still
some of the most brutal in the
world, responsible
for 20 percent of the homicides
in the city,
according to Amnesty
International.
Police officials have continued
to defend
pacification. They blame drastic
budget cuts
for many of the problems.
Colonel Ibis Pereira
is a former police commander in
Rio. He says
the economic crisis in Brazil
has severely
crippled the policing program.
He also believes
the spike in violence is partly
tied to the
imminent arrival of the
Olympics.
COL. IBIS PEREIRA, Former Police
Commander
(through translator): Drug
trafficking is
a business that follows the same
logic of
trade around the world, supply
and demand.
So, there is an expectation of
profit, with
the presence of millions of
visitors to Rio,
and there is a moment of
weakness in the UPP
program.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Now many
are asking themselves
if there is a future for
pacification.
ROBERT MUGGAH, Igarape
Institute: There is
a sense in the police force and
within the
public at large in Rio generally
that pacification
has hit a wall.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Robert
Muggah studies
security and development at the
Igarape Institute
in Rio. He says there will be
tens of thousands
of security forces protecting
tourists and
infrastructure during these
Olympics, twice
the size of those used in the
last Summer
Games. But that was London, and
this is Brazil,
one of the most unequal
countries on Earth.
And these Games, says Muggah,
will move resources
away from marginal communities.
ROBERT MUGGAH: Now, if you are a
white tourist
coming in from Europe or North
America, you're
going to be absolutely safe.
However, if you
are a low-income black resident
from a favela
in the lead-up to the Olympics,
and just afterward,
you are actually going to be
experience probably
a heightened sense of
insecurity.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Brazil has
promised the
Rio games will be safe. But
Olympic officials
acknowledge it's not enough to
just secure
the games.
MARIO ANDRADA, Communications
Director, Rio
2014: What we need to push, and
we will do
so, is to have more security
before the Games,
and more security after the
games. We don't
want the Games to be an island
of success
and perfection. We want the
Games to transform
Rio, and to make Rio a safer
city in the years
to come.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: What part
pacification
will play in that is unclear.
And that worries
Rodrigo da Silva, who supports
the program.
If the police pull out of the
favelas after
the Olympics, he predicts the
worst.
RODRIGO DA SILVA (through
translator): There
will be more violence, more
violence in all
the communities because of the
fights between
the drug gangs, fights against
the police.
In the end, the ones who will
pay for this
will be the residents, as
always.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: As Rio de
Janeiro gets
ready for the Summer Games, da
Silva says
his Olympic dreams of a new life
shared by
many others are already out of
reach.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lulu
Garcia-Navarro
NPR News, Rio de Janeiro.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": why
a city seen
as an economic success story
isn't satisfied
with the president's record;
Vermont schools
facing consolidation or closure;
and confessions
of an Abu Ghraib interrogator.
But first: Torrential rains and
flooding in
Southern and Central Texas have
made for a
damaging and even deadly couple
of weeks.
A crest on the Brazos River is
eclipsing records
set more than two decades ago.
Large sections
of Fort Bend County just
southwest of Houston
are underwater. Residents there
and in several
other cities have been
evacuated. At least
six people have died since last
week. And
more rain is expected in the
coming days as
the weather pattern pushes east.
We get a report from one of the
worst-hit
areas.
Jeff Braun is the emergency
management coordinator
in Fort Bend County and joins me
via Skype.
Jeff, I said these records were
set a couple
of decades ago. Tell me, have
you seen it
this bad before?
JEFF BRAUN, Emergency Management
Coordinator,
Fort Bend County: No. No, Hari,
we have not
seen it this bad. 1994 was the
record flood
here at the Richmond Gauge --
the city of
Richmond is the center part of
the county,
and there's a gauge there that
everybody bases
their flood finding on.
The record was 50.3 at that
gauge. We're going
to be somewhere about four feet
or a little
over four feet higher than the
water's ever
been seen in the county in the
last 25 years.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We see aerial
pictures sometimes
of horses being pulled off the
farm on to
porches of homes. We just see
huge swathes
of rural area that just look
like large lakes
now. How long until those drain?
JEFF BRAUN: Yes, it's a major
concern for
us.
The water that enters into the
city of Simonton,
which is the first town in Fort
Bend County
hat has the Brazos River,
there's probably
over 300 homes that have water
in them there.
Today, we also have the Texas
Animal Health
Commission going out to work
with some of
the ranchers out there because
they have cattle
that are in compromised
positions.
The water is flowing down the
river, not only
in rural areas, but into some of
our denser
populated areas in the
Rosenberg-Richmond
area, and the water level is
going to crest
in a very long, slow time frame.
So we may
be looking at several days,
maybe even a week,
of the water staying at the
level that it's
at right now, which is several
feet above
what would be the record crest.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jeff, these --
these -- that
river snakes all the way across
your county,
and it has a lot of different
bends and probably
a lot of different elevations as
well.
Are there particular areas
you're more concerned
about in the coming days, in the
coming weeks
that will be basically more
populated?
JEFF BRAUN: Well, the city of
Simonton and
Rosenberg were the first two
cities hit. And
they both had mandatory
evacuations. The city
of Richmond has a mandatory and
voluntary
evacuation.
We have large parts of the
unincorporated
area of the county that have
been affected,
as the river crests in Richmond
is then going
to move down into the southern
part of the
county. A good part of the
southern part of
the county has levees. All our
leveed areas
are in fine shape. All the lid
operators are
doing a great job.
So there's no worry there. But
then once we
get past the lid areas, we're
looking at some
other areas where it is a
combination of rural
houses, and also more
bottomland, where there's
cattle and horses.
A lot of those individuals have
taken heed
of the warnings and have moved a
lot of the
people and livestock out of the
way.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Jeff Braun, the
emergency management coordinator
in Fort Bend
County, thanks so much for
joining us. I know
it's a busy day for you. Thank
you.
JEFF BRAUN: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: From where the
water is
to where it may be going.
Houston, which has
dealt with severe flooding
waters in recent
years, is bracing for
floodwaters to come
its way.
Michael Walter is with the
Office of Emergency
Management for the city. He
joins me now.
So, lot of times, the
floodwaters in Texas,
they basically go through
Houston to get to
the Gulf of Mexico. How
concerned are you?
MICHAEL WALTER, Houston Office
of Emergency
Management: Well, obviously,
whenever we have
significant rainfall events that
are back
to back the way that we have
seen the last
couple of months, we're very
concerned about
the impacts that we could have
here in the
city.
We have had a history of
rivering flooding
in our area, and so we are, as
always, continuing
to monitor that. Unfortunately,
it's just
the way that Houston was built.
This was a
small town that was eclipsed by
the town of
Galveston when it was built.
And so, since then, we have just
had a lot
of development, we have had a
lot of building,
but, unfortunately, the way that
the Southeast
Texas area drains is through a
system of bayous.
So if we do receive heavy
amounts of rain
in concentrated areas, that can
put a lot
of strain on the bayous towards
the Gulf of
Mexico, which then results in
flooding.
We have done a lot of work
locally to help
mitigate against the flooding.
There is still
a lot of work to do. And the
city and our
partners at Harris County, Fort
Bend County,
Montgomery County, all the
different jurisdictions
around us, we are really
committed to helping
to solve some of these flooding
problems,
and also just letting people
know what to
expect and what steps they need
to take to
prepare ahead of these types of
situations.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Flooding is
one of those
things that you can somewhat
prepare for when
you know that the rain is heavy,
it's falling,
and you can see the flooding is
happening
upstream.
Are you trying to prepare parts
of Houston
for possibly evacuations like
there are happening
in Fort Bend County?
MICHAEL WALTER: So, our major
concern in the
city of Houston is not so much
the river flooding
that you see on the Brazos in
Fort Bend County
and in the other parts to the
west of the
city.
Our major concern is flash
flooding. That
usually is what impacts us here.
So, that's
really our concern. We're
looking at rainfall
totals. We're looking at the
location of where
that rain is going to fall. The
last three
federally declared disasters we
had, which
were all within one calendar
year of each
other, were all mostly related
to flash flooding
and water quickly rising and
water quickly
receding in our neighborhoods.
So, that's a little bit more
what we're concerned
about. We are monitoring the
Addicks and Barker
reservoirs, which are on the
west side of
Houston, which were built in the
late '30s
following a catastrophic flood
in downtown
Houston. Those are holding up.
They are holding
the water. It is blocking some
roads in that
area, but those are doing the
job that they're
doing.
And the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers has been
working very closely to control
the amount
of water coming out of those
reservoirs as
it flows into a bayou that comes
right through
downtown Houston.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Michael Walter
with the Office of Emergency
Management for
the city of Houston, thanks for
joining us.
MICHAEL WALTER: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tomorrow,
President Obama
will return to the first city he
visited after
becoming president, Elkhart,
Indiana. It was
one of the worst-hit cities back
in 2009,
and the president will be
delivering a speech
to tout what's been accomplished
since then.
He will sit down with our Gwen
Ifill for an
interview while he's there, and
then answer
questions from residents in a
town hall special
we will be airing tomorrow
night.
It all comes during a tough
phase of the election
cycle, as the president seeks to
make a case
for his legacy.
John Yang has the story.
JOHN YANG: President Obama's
trip to Elkhart,
Indiana, tomorrow marks his
fifth visit since
he was a candidate in 2008.
In 2009, he went there to
announce $170 million
in federal stimulus money for
Elkhart County.
Elkhart is a city of about
50,000 people that
is known as the R.V. capital of
the world,
an industry on the rebound since
cratering
during the recession.
At its worst, unemployment
reached 20 percent.
Now it's 3.8 percent. Some give
the president
a certain amount of credit for
that.
JERRY YOUNG, Elkhart, Indiana:
He's been doing
as best as he could do. It
wasn't perfect
when he got in.
PAM LAMBRIGHT, Elkhart, Indiana:
We have come
a long way. I think that the
economy is fairly
good now. When it crashed in
'08, it was like
a ghost town around here.
JOHN YANG: Ed Neufeldt knows
that firsthand.
Laid off from his job in the
R.V. industry
in 2009, he now works four
part-time jobs,
including cleaning a doctor's
office. He's
thankful there's enough work for
him.
ED NEUFELDT, Elkhart, Indiana:
If you want
a job in Elkhart County, there's
a job. You
can find a job. There's help
wanted signs
all over. Elkhart's doing great.
JOHN YANG: It's quite a contract
to when we
last met him in 2009, when his
employer of
32 years closed.
ED NEUFELDT: We were one of the
bigger corporations.
I thought we would be one of the
last to be
around, but we weren't.
JOHN YANG: Despite the recovery,
Neufeldt
says there's a big divide
globally. Republicans
and Democrats can't get along.
ED NEUFELDT: They're angry.
That's the reason
so many people are voting for
Donald Trump.
They want to see a change. I
guess they feel
like government is just -- is
crooked.
In fact, with President Obama
going to Elkhart
tomorrow to make his case for an
economic
legacy, Neufeldt presents one of
the challenges
for the president and for the
Democratic candidates
who want to succeed it. Neufeldt
doesn't know
who he will vote for in the
fall.
And when the "NewsHour" caught
up with locals
at the Memorial Day Parade, some
said they
were unhappy with the president,
like this
Trump supporter who listed his
complaints
with Mr. Obama.
KENNETH STORY, Elkhart, Indiana:
Lack of pride
of America and everybody getting
their feelings
hurt over stupid things.
JOHN YANG: In 2012, President
Obama lost Elkhart
County to Mitt Romney by a 2-1
wide margin
on his way to losing the state.
Although Elkhart's
fortunes and those of the R.V.
industry have
made a dramatic turnaround, the
lingering
anxiety mirrors communities
across the country
worried about their future.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Vermont is in
the midst
of the largest reorganization of
public schools
it has seen in the last 125
years. As many
other rural states have already
done, Vermont
wants to consolidate its many
small school
districts. But it's not
happening without
a fight.
Special correspondent John
Tulenko of Education
Week has this report as part of
our weekly
education series, Making the
Grade.
JOHN TULENKO: Vermont is a
collection of small
towns, many with just one or two
schools,
and where people feel they have
a say in their
children's education.
SUZANNE HULL-PARENT, School
Board Member:
People have a very loud voice.
You know, some
people will say Montpelier
controls everything,
there's really not a lot of
voice left. Well,
there is.
JOHN TULENKO: Like Suzanne
Hull-Parent, Vermonters
stay close with their schools
through their
locally elected school boards.
There's one
for almost every town.
SUZANNE HULL-PARENT: I have been
on the school
board for 12 years. I think when
you have
local people living in the
community, making
the decisions about their school
the best
they can, it's going to be more
vested in
the good of that community.
JOHN TULENKO: Something else
about Vermont
schools, they're among the
smallest in the
country.
SUZANNE HULL-PARENT: You get
more individual
attention. I was blessed to have
that and
I'm blessed to have my children
have that.
And my daughter feels like she
has a voice.
And I'm not sure, in a bigger
place, that
she would feel she had a voice.
JOHN TULENKO: Small schools and
local control
are in the DNA here. But that's
changing as
a result of a new state law
called Act 46.
It aims to consolidate Vermont's
school districts
and reduce their numbers by
half.
For now, communities can vote
yes to unification
and get tax breaks or say no and
lose a portion
of their school funding, and
risk being assigned
into a merger by the state.
WOMAN: And I don't see how this
is helpful
for our children.
WOMAN: But what if the vote is
no? What happens?
JAY NICHOLS, Superintendent,
Franklin Northeast
Supervisory Union: Change is
hard. I think
change is hard.
JOHN TULENKO: For school
superintendent Jay
Nichols, change could help many
students.
Nichols oversees five small
school districts
in Northern Vermont. Two of them
are neighboring
districts, Richford and
Enosburg, and both
have high schools.
JAY NICHOLS: Enosburg High
School, by Vermont
standards, a good-sized high
school, comprehensive
school, offers a lot of
programming, you know,
seven or eight A.P. classes, has
a Junior
ROTC program, which has saved
kids. Parents
will tell you, that has saved
their kids and
had them not drop out of school,
because of
Junior ROTC. Richford kids can't
go do that.
JOHN TULENKO: Richford High
School, in the
town next door, offers only two
A.P. classes,
not to mention no ROTC. The
reason for this
is size.
JAY NICHOLS: It's a smaller
school, and it's
all about economies of scale.
And they offer
as much as they can for the size
that they
are.
JOHN TULENKO: Richford has about
150 students.
Enosburg has roughly double.
JAY NICHOLS: If we become one
district, a
kid could take some classes in
Enosburg, some
classes in Richford. If we share
the staff,
and share all the kids, we can
offer more.
That's all.
JOHN TULENKO: But Act 46 was
designed to accomplish
another goal, tax relief.
Two-thirds of the
money Vermont spends on public
schools comes
from property taxes.
SHAP SMITH, Vermont State
Speaker of the House:
It's a statewide property tax.
And when people
get their bill, it tends to be a
big one.
JOHN TULENKO: House Speaker Shap
Smith pushed
Act 46 through the state
legislature.
SHAP SMITH: One of the things
that was driving
change was the fact that we have
declining
enrollment, and yet we have
increasing expenses.
Our student-to-teacher ratio is
one of the
lowest in the country, and that
is driving
the education costs for the last
15 to 20
years.
JAY NICHOLS: We have too many
adults for the
number of kids we have. That's
why we have
the most expensive education
system in the
United States.
JOHN TULENKO: Act 46 could lower
costs by
sharing staff and resources, but
the fear
is, some districts will go
farther.
SUZANNE HULL-PARENT: You will
see school closures.
JOHN TULENKO: To Vermonters like
Suzanne Hull-Parent,
that would be significant.
SUZANNE HULL-PARENT: You're
losing the heart
of many communities. That's
where they meet.
That's where they have functions
that aren't
even school-related. That's
where families
in need get support services. I
think it just
is going to be devastating to
communities.
I think they're going to change
the landscape
of Vermont with that.
JOHN TULENKO: Closing small
schools means
having to send students
elsewhere, to larger
schools that offer more courses,
but may not
be better.
STUDENT: Like, people who go to
small schools,
like they -- when they graduate,
they leave
with something unique and
special that other
people don't have.
STUDENT: I came from a huge
school with a
lot of resources, and I came in
knowing that
there wasn't as many advanced
programs. But
connection is really important.
You know,
there's a lot of support here.
JOHN TULENKO: Act 46 does
prohibit school
closings for at least four
years, but there
are other things Vermonters
would have to
give up right away.
JAY NICHOLS: School choice in
Vermont. If
you live in a town that is a
tuition town,
you can go to school any place
you want, paid
for by the taxpayers.
JOHN TULENKO: Tuition towns are
those without
schools, often middle schools
and high schools.
Merging could cost them school
choice.
MAN: Today, we have the ability
to send our
kids to the best fit for them,
and we're going
to give that up.
JOHN TULENKO: Many of these
parents in Montgomery,
Vermont, send their children to
public and
private high schools, including
this private
school in Canada, using school
choice vouchers
worth some $14,000 each. In all,
it's about
a million dollars that's
projected to leave
the district.
JAY NICHOLS: This is a huge
portion of the
budget that we can keep in our
local schools
and communities.
JOHN TULENKO: Could you offer
more A.P. courses?
JAY NICHOLS: We certainly could.
JOHN TULENKO: You don't think
there's a chance
that that million dollars...
SUZANNE HULL-PARENT: Is just
going to infuse
in and get -- no, I don't think
that's going
to happen. No, no.
JOHN TULENKO: All these debates
will soon
be put to the voters. On June 7,
residents
here will decide whether to move
forward on
plans to merge.
In Franklin County, Vermont, I'm
John Tulenko
of Education Week reporting for
the "PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: The military's
use of forced
interrogation has always been a
contentious
subject, even though many who
may have once
approved of its use now have
second thoughts.
Our newest addition to the
"NewsHour" bookshelf
is Eric Fair's "Consequence: A
Memoir."
Judy Woodruff recently talked
with him about
his firsthand experience with
torture.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Eric Fair,
welcome to the "NewsHour."
ERIC FAIR, Author, "Consequence:
A Memoir":
Thanks for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, this is a
very painful
book to read. What did you want
to accomplish
by writing it?
ERIC FAIR: I know that it's a
painful book
to read.
It was an incredibly a painful
and chaotic
book to write. And I think what
I wanted to
accomplish was, I have been
writing about
my experiences in Iraq for close
to 10 years
now. And I have been writing
mostly op-eds
and small essays.
And I think it was important for
me to get
the entire story down. It was
submitted originally
just about Iraq. And at that
point, editors
and agents suggested that I
needed to spend
more time exploring the whole
story.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Remind our
audience why you
ended up in Iraq in the first
place. You were
working for a contractor, a
company that was
hired to be involved in
interrogating prisoners
of war.
ERIC FAIR: Right. Sure.
I had been in the Army from 1990
to 2000.
I was an Arabic linguist. And I
had received
my discharge in 2000, when it
appeared that
there was no reason for an
Arabic linguist
to be in the Army. Nothing
seemed to be going
on in the world.
I went back home to Bethlehem,
Pennsylvania,
became a police officer, and was
subsequently
diagnosed with a heart condition
that ended
my career. And this was after
9/11. The war
in Iraq was just beginning to
ramp up. The
invasion was over. Contracting
companies were
desperate for employees in a
number of different
positions. And they were
desperate to get
people over as quickly as
possible.
And I knew it was the one way
that I could
essentially sneak in without any
kind of health
examination and get back into
that community.
I had supported the invasion and
I felt like
I had an obligation, because of
that support,
to be a part of it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What did you
think you were
going to be doing when you went
to Iraq, and
then how did that compare with
what you found
yourself in the middle of?
ERIC FAIR: My experience with a
war in the
Middle East had been, like many
Americans,
with the first Gulf War.
And so the impression that I had
was that
we -- there would be thousands
of Iraqi troops
surrendering, being brought back
to the rear,
and then essentially debriefed.
And so we
would have talked to them about
the units
that they were in and the
strength of those
units, things like the kind of
weapons they
had or the systems -- that
weapons systems,
to gauge just how committed and
how strong
these troops were.
We had not anticipated doing
interrogations
or being part of a prisoner of
war camp in
Iraq and surrounded by combat.
And so we were
driven out to Abu Ghraib and
essentially started
work the next day. And much of
it was really
more associated with law
enforcement.
It was the idea of deciding
whether or not
someone was guilty or why they
had been captured,
or if they should stay in
custody. The insurgency
was just beginning to ramp up at
point. Mortars
were definitely coming into Abu
Ghraib, but
soldiers were being killed by
IEDs. The death
count was continuing to rise.
The idea that the insurgency or
the war was
going to end was clear to us
that it wasn't.
And so there was an absolute
need for more
intelligence information to
figure out what
was going wrong.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You write in a
lot of detail,
graphic detail, about what you
saw, how people
were treated. Was it a matter of
not expecting
this? What do you think,
ultimately, drove
you to want to get out of there?
ERIC FAIR: I think I was aware
right away
that, morally, this was
difficult, the kind
of treatment that prisoners were
receiving.
But, in terms of the legal
issues surrounding
it, it was policy. And this is
essentially
what we were supposed to be
doing. The vast
majority of us, as contractors,
were prior
soldiers. And so we felt a
commitment to the
people in uniform and to
ourselves and to
our community to do these
things.
I lasted about two months doing
interrogations.
And then eventually I took
another position
back in Baghdad that wasn't
involved in interrogations.
But I knew then, even though
that I had supported
the war, that the invasion was
wrong. There
clearly were no chemical weapons
in Iraq.
And much of the narrative that
we heard about
what was going on there simply
wasn't true.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So much of the
book, Eric Fair,
is about how this affected you
and continues
to affect you.
ERIC FAIR: The process started
in late 2006,
in which I knew I needed to
start writing
about some of the things that I
had done.
And I knew that the only way to
do that effectively
was to write about my own role.
And so it
wasn't to be a policy pundit and
talk about
the administration or about the
legal issues
surrounding it, but I needed to
provide an
honest account of my own
narrative.
Now, at the time when I started
writing, I
wasn't calling this torture.
That's something
I only processed recently and
begun to realize
that, absolutely, the things we
did is torture.
And so there have been
consequences for me.
But I recognize that the people
who were on
the other side of the table in
the interrogation
booths are the ones who suffered
the true
consequences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you want
to come out
of this book?
ERIC FAIR: Well, I think, like
any writer,
it's some sort of hope for a
change of the
narrative.
We have a presidential -- we
have presidential
candidates who are now talking
about water-boarding
and talking about other
aggressive techniques.
We have the director of the CIA
suggesting
that his men or his employees
wouldn't water-board,
which is encouraging, but also
very disturbing
in terms of -- it's a
recognition of where
we can go, and we can still go
back to where
we were.
In fact, we may even go back to
something
-- something far worse. So,
there needs to
be an honest narrative about not
only what
this does to certainly the
personnel that
we will put in these positions,
but to the
-- the kind of things that it
does to the
people that are in our prisoner
of war camps.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did you come away
of a clear
idea of what is within the
bounds of what
should be permitted when
interrogating someone
who has done something terrible
against the
United States, whether it's ISIS
or al-Qaida
or something, and what steps
over the line?
Did you come away knowing what
that line is?
ERIC FAIR: No.
And I think that's an excellent
question,
because I think once you begin
to push the
limits of interrogation, which,
in and of
itself, is already kind of a
potentially abusive
sort of thing, forcing someone
to talk to
you, the minute you begin to
push those limits,
and the minute you entitle
yourself to force
someone to cooperate with you,
to essentially
change their will, you have
moved into this
world of torture.
Torture, for me, were things
like stress positions,
and in particular sleep
deprivation. And I
know that a good number of
Americans would
scoff and even laugh and suggest
that we can
go as far as water-boarding. And
I think you
can see just how lost we are in
this idea
that there are different levels
of abuse and
different levels of
interrogation.
It's anything that violates
another human
being's will is torture. And, as
Americans,
I think that's the attitude we
need to have.
We don't care what about
organizations like
ISIS or intelligence agencies in
a place like
Syria are doing.
We care about what we're doing.
We care about
the image that we project. We
have an obligation
to things like the Constitution
and the Bill
of Rights. And those things
require us to
behave in a certain way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Eric Fair, the
book is "Consequence:
A Memoir."
And we thank you very much for
talking with
us.
ERIC FAIR: Thanks for your time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Coming up
tomorrow night
on PBS: a one-hour special
hosted by Gwen
Ifill, including an interview
with President
Obama followed by a town hall
meeting.
GWEN IFILL: Tune in tomorrow for
a "PBS NewsHour"
special, speaking with the
president of the
United States.
I'm Gwen Ifill. Join me in
Elkhart, Indiana,
for a town hall with President
Obama. From
the economy to fighting terror
to who will
succeed him in the Oval Office,
everything's
on the table. That's June 1 at
8:00 p.m.,
7:00 Central, only on PBS.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
"NewsHour" online
right now: It's job hunting
season for new
college grads. For them, and for
anyone else
looking for work right now, our
employment
expert offers four basic
principles for getting
the respect you deserve at a job
interview.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tonight on "Charlie Rose,"
comedian and late-night
host Samantha Bee talks about
the first season
of her show, "Full Frontal."
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday, Miles O'Brien gets
a look at
inflatable space pods, which
could be key
to future space travel.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you. Have
a good night.